date: 2014-04-04 09:12:41 -0500
categories: journal

# Radio silence and the remote worker

Years ago, before I began working remotely full time, I would often steal away
to a hidden conference room on some sparsely inhabited floor to hide out and
work. Getting work done often meant getting away from the office chatter.

The sounds of other people working can be overwhelming. It doesn't take much to
overload my senses and shut down my brain.

The nature of remote work changes the nature of communication. Chatter for
remote workers comes in a different form. Messages are often asynchronous and
non-blocking. The result is longer periods of intense focus and concentration.
Productivity ensues.

As much as we still complain about our clogged inboxes, for remote workers,
noise is seldom the problem. It's silence.

If a little quiet is good for work, then more quiet should be better, right?
For me, a prolonged lull in email, chat room conversations, and @mentions can
have its own negative effects.

## Isolation

Even the most independent people need regular human interaction. I normally
work at home, where we also [homeschool our kids][]. When not at home, I
frequent local coffee shops with friends in the industry. I'm rarely alone.

Yet the co-workers I work with most are in [North Carolina][] and [South
Dakota][], quite the hike from North Texas.

When online communication lapses, it's easy to feel isolated with that kind of
distance between team members.

## Identity crisis

We all have our areas of expertise within our organizations. We are the keepers
of certain domain knowledge. While it can become taxing to constantly field
questions, there's a joy in sharing that knowledge with others. For better or
worse, we often form our identities on being The API Guy, The JavaScript Gal,
The HR Lady, or The Product Person.

When people stop asking you questions it's easy to begin doubting (however
misguidedly) the value you bring to the team.

## Tips for handling the silence

Chatter is seldom constant. Every din will eventually recede during periods of
travel, holidays, and life events. It's the artificial lulls that you have to
watch. Here are some things that help me handle that cycle.

- **Never work alone.** It sounds obvious, but your chances of getting isolated
decrease considerably when you're actively part of a team. Enlist support for
features or initiatives you want to work on, or pitch in on someone else's
efforts. We're [better together][].

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/qT90jZP58jM"
frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- **Look out for each other.** On the flip side, don't become so blinded by
your own TODO list that you fail to notice when a co-worker has gone radio
silent. An email, IM, or phone call has real power to help someone feel more
included. I have no official HR responsibilities, but I try to reach out to new
GitHubbers a few weeks after they're hired, just to say "I'm glad you're here,
are you getting plugged in?"

- **Embrace the rhythm.** Take advantage of those brief periods of peace and
quiet, knowing things will get loud again soon.

Embrace the noise as the soothing sounds of :ship:-ing.


[homeschool our kids]: http://smalltexas.com/tagged/homeschool
[better together]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qT90jZP58jM
[North Carolina]: https://twitter.com/jasonrudolph
[South Dakota]: https://twitter.com/technoweenie
